# Modulo Palette Swapper

## Introduction

Something that came up at work this week was the topic of palette swapping. This is a common technique whereby a set of colours in a source image are swapped out for a different colour. It reduces the number of assets that need to be created by allowing things like changing costume colour to be done programmatically. This technique has a long history and dates back to hardware where a game's colour palette was a dedicated space in memory and changing the palette would change the appearance of sprites drawn to the screen. Palette swapping can be used with high res assets - The Swords Of Ditto used a palette swapper, for example - but it's most commonly associated with pixel art games.

You can do palette swapping by splitting an image into many layers and then tinting each layer but this results in a lot of overdraw and its use is limited. Palette swapping is most often accomplished in a fragment (pixel) shader and this is the focus of this particular article. Mapping between input and output colours for a palette swapper are assumed to be 1:1 with no tolerance/threshold values i.e. "old school" or "hard" palette swapping. (Soft palette swapping using tolerances/thresholds are useful for dealing with high res images but that's a topic for another time.)

A note on terminology: I'll be using the word "colour" a lot. It's going to get a fit repetitive but there's no way around that. There are three types of colour that a palette swapper concerns itself with. Firstly, there are the "input" colours. These are colours found by sampling the image that's being drawn. Secondly, there are "target" colours which are the colours we're looking to replace. Not all colours in an image are going to be target colours, a classic example is the whites of a character's eyes or the brown of a leather belt. Finally, we have "output" colours. There are the colours that we are using as the replacements. Output colours are typically grouped together in palettes that an artist predefines, though some games allow a playet to define their own colours.

## Colour Searching

A palette swap takes an input colour sampled from the image itself, finds which target colour that matches, and then spits out a new output colour so that it can be drawn. The output colours are dynamic and can be changed at runtime. The target colours are invariably known at compile time as they need to match the source image. Because output colours can change at runtime, they are stored in an array (or a lookup texture - more on that later). This means input colours are first translated into an array index via the target colours and then the output colour is determined by whatever value is stored in that array. 

There are well over 16 million possible combinations of values for a 24-bit RGB colour. It is inadviseable to create a 16 million entry array that handles every single value, and this sort of thing isn't possible in a shader anyway. After all, the palette for a sprite is rarely more than a couple dozen colours, if that. Instead, palette swappers must find a way to reduce the amount of space that's needed to match input colours to target colours.

The most basic solution to this problem is to send an array (or LUT) into the shader that contains only exactly the input and output colours that are relevant. We can then iterate over that array in a fragment shader trying to find a matching input colour. This isn't the worst idea but it's slow and scales poorly due to O(n) complexity. Furthermore, if you use an array to contain input colours then you'll hit a limit on how many uniform registers you can use which puts a hard limit on the number of colours you can swap. To make matters worse, where that limit is depends massively on the hardware you're testing on! If you opt for an LUT instead of an array then it's even slower due to the expense of texture sampling.

## Colour Indexing

Instead of iterating over an array of colours, smart developers can instead to use "colour indexing". This method requires replacing swappable colours in an image at some point before compiling the game. Instead of seeing a colour in an image as an actual colour, colour index treats colours as mere data. In this case, colours that are swappable are replaced with (typically) a greyscale value. Each greyscale value is actually an index value for a future colour array passed into a shader.

For example, if you wanted to swap red to blue then you'd process your image to replace every red pixel with a greyscale value of #010101. When drawing this image, you'd use a shader that takes greyscale images and turns it into an index value for an array. #010101 would become `1`. This index is then used to read an output colour from an array sent into the shader. (It's less common to use textures for colour indexing but it is an option when replacing a large number of colours.)

The problem with colour indexing is that it requires pre-processing all your images that need colour swapping. It's not a trivial task to write tooling to do that and it is unlikely to be within reach of most indie developers. You also need to ensure that colour indexes match the correct position in the array across all those images which, again, is a lot of work to manage. Finally, if your art assets change (which is always right up until the final moments in production) then you'll need to process your art all over again. And if you've process all your art then you really should all your art to make sure nothing broken. It's a lot of technical, fiddly work that is liable to break exactly when you need it not to.

## Modulo

What we want is the speed of colour indexing with the convenience of colour searching. Whilst it's not possible to be quite as memory efficient as either of the two techniques discussed, we can use some simple maths to improve the situation considerably.

If we look at the "colour search" solution, we discover our array index by iterating over all the input colours. The "colour index" solution treats the input colour itself as an array index (after pre-processing). What we're going to do instead for our new solution is calculate the array index using the modulo mathematical function. (I won't explain what modulo does in detail here because if you're implementing a palette swap shader you probably know already. If you don't, [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-science/cryptography/modarithmetic/a/what-is-modular-arithmetic) has a decent article.)

What're going to do is calculate the array index as simply `arrayIndex = inputColour mod base`. Because we're using modulo, we know that calculated array indexes can never exceed the base of the modulo function which puts a hard limit on the maximum length of the array. We further choose an appropriate base such that none of the calculated array indexes overlap for the input colours we're concerned with. We want to choose the base that gives us the smallest range of array indexes. This means our final array can be as small as possible.

After doing this work, getting an output colour is as simple as `outputColour = array[(inputColour mod base) - minIndex]`. This is fast for the GPU to calculate in a fragment shader and doesn't require any image processing work.

Actually finding the right modulo base is a process of brute force, or at least I haven't found a good way of finding the best base without a greedy search. As a result, this isn't a quick process and can take a while. The good news is that it only needs to happen once and any results can be cached for use later. Potentially these results can even be pre-computed before compiling the game.

Something to point out here is that the array indexes will be unorder and non-consecutive. There is typically some space between entries in the array. This isn't ideal but it's a lot better than the situation we started with: millions of empty spaces. Part of the trade-off of using the modulo solution is not having 100% memory efficiency.
